[DPE-6745] docs: update README.md (#21)
canonical/kafka-connect-operator: README.md

# Charmed Apache Kafka Connect Operator

[![Release](https://github.com/canonical/kafka-connect-operator/actions/workflows/release.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/canonical/kafka-connect-operator/actions/workflows/release.yaml)
[![Tests](https://github.com/canonical/kafka-connect-operator/actions/workflows/ci.yaml/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/canonical/kafka-connect-operator/actions/workflows/ci.yaml?query=branch%3Amain)
[![Docs](https://github.com/canonical/kafka-connect-operator/actions/workflows/sync_docs.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/canonical/kafka-connect-operator/actions/workflows/sync_docs.yaml)

> ## Overview

Author: Done here: https://github.com/canonical/kafka-connect-operator/pull/21/commits/7846cf1ee78f7372c2fd33e9e3e2b3d16dc8edf3

The Charmed Apache Kafka Connect Operator delivers automated operations management from day 0 to day 2 on [Apache Kafka Connect](https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#connect).

This operator can be found on [Charmhub](https://charmhub.io/kafka-connect) and it comes with production-ready features such as:
- Automated and/or manual connector plugins management.

> - Fault-tolerance, replication and scalability out-of-the-box.

Reviewer: Suggestion: Improved wording.

```suggestion
- Fault-tolerance, replication and scalability out of the box.
```

- Authenticaon on REST API enabled by default.

> - TLS support both on the REST API and Kafka cluster relations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- TLS support both on the REST API and Apache Kafka cluster relations.
```

> - Seamless integration with Charmed Kafka set of operators

Reviewer: Question: What is Charmed Kafka set of operators? Kafka and ZooKeeper?

```suggestion
- Seamless integration with Charmed Apache Kafka set of operators
```

- Seamless integration with an ecosystem of of Integrator charms supporting common ETL tasks on different database technologies offered by [Canonical Data Platform](https://canonical.com/data).

> The Apache Kafka Connect Operator uses the latest Apache Kafka release, made available using the [*charmed-kafka* snap](https://github.com/canonical/charmed-kafka-snap) distributed by Canonical.

Reviewer: Chore: In most cases, we do not use the word Kafka without the word Apache in front of it. Check the terminology section in our Contributor's guide for Kafka: https://github.com/canonical/kafka-operator/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md#terminology
Notably, the only **exception** for this is **Kafka Connect** as a proper name of the technology/component (see the link above).

```suggestion
The Kafka Connect charmed operator uses the latest Apache Kafka release, made available using the [*charmed-kafka* snap](https://github.com/canonical/charmed-kafka-snap) distributed by Canonical.
```

Author: Thanks, fixed here: https://github.com/canonical/kafka-connect-operator/pull/21/commits/cb54a73e5bcee22bbaa5ba4e62fab13a7dfcc641

> The Apache Kafka Connect Operator uses the latest Apache Kafka release, made available using the [*charmed-kafka* snap](https://github.com/canonical/charmed-kafka-snap) distributed by Canonical.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Apache Kafka Connect Operator uses the latest [`charmed-kafka`](https://github.com/canonical/charmed-kafka-snap) snap containing Apache Kafka distributed by Canonical.
```

> The Apache Kafka Connect Operator uses the latest Apache Kafka release, made available using the [*charmed-kafka* snap](https://github.com/canonical/charmed-kafka-snap) distributed by Canonical.

Author: Thanks for the suggestion, fixed here with product naming rules taken into consideration: https://github.com/canonical/kafka-connect-operator/pull/21/commits/cb54a73e5bcee22bbaa5ba4e62fab13a7dfcc641

As Apache Kafka Connect requires a running Kafka cluster, this operator makes use of the [Kafka Operator](https://github.com/canonical/kafka-operator) in order to function.

## Usage

### Deployment and Basic Usage

Before using Apache Kafka Connect, a Kafka cluster needs to be deployed. The Charmed Kafka operator can be deployed as follows:
```shell

> $ juju deploy kafka --channel 3/edge -n 3 --config roles="broker,controller"

Author: Thanks for the suggestion, we don't need `--trust` in VM but I'd definitely include it in K8s README.

In the Charmed Apache Kafka Connect operator, adding a plugin is as simple as calling the `juju attach-resource` command. Make sure that you bundle all required JAR files into a single TAR archive (let's call that `my-plugin.tar`) and then use the following command:

```shell
juju attach-resource kafka-connect connect-plugin=./my-plugin.tar
```

This would trigger a restart of `kafka-connect` charm, once all units show as `active|idle`, your desired plugin is ready to use. 

There is no limit on the number of plugins that could be manually added. However, the recommended way for common use-cases of ETL tasks on Data Platform charmed operators is by using the [Template Connect Integrator](https://github.com/canonical/template-connect-integrator) charm.

## Relations

The Charmed Apache Kafka Connect Operator supports Juju [relations](https://juju.is/docs/olm/relations) for interfaces listed below.

#### `connect_client` interface:

> The `connect_client` interface is used with any requirer/integrator charm adhering to the `connect-client` charm relation interface. Integrators will automatically handle connectors/tasks lifecycle on Apache Kafka Connect including plugin management, startup, cleanup, and scaling, and simplify common ETL operations on Data Platform line of products.

Author: You're right about the tautology, tried to rephrase it: https://github.com/canonical/kafka-connect-operator/pull/21/commits/e66992cea0403c794425fd7994e6ac179ecbef99

There's a link at the beginning for canonical.com/data and I've also added another link here

A curated set of integrators for common ETL use cases on Canonical Data Platform line of products are provided in the [Template Connect Integrator](https://github.com/canonical/template-connect-integrator) repository. These cover use-cases such as loading data from/to MySQL, PostgreSQL, Opensearch, S3-compliant storage services, and active/passive replication of Apache Kafka topics using MirrorMaker.

#### `tls-certificates` interface:

> The `tls-certificates` interface could be used with any charm that adheres to [`tls-certifcates`](https://github.com/canonical/charm-relation-interfaces/tree/main/docs/json_schemas/tls_certificates/v1) **provider** charm relation interface. One example is the [`self-signed-certificates`](https://github.com/canonical/self-signed-certificates-operator) operator by Canonical.

Author: You're right, tried to clarify here: https://github.com/canonical/kafka-connect-operator/pull/21/commits/e66992cea0403c794425fd7994e6ac179ecbef99

> Note that TLS could be enabled in three different modes:

Reviewer: Suggestion: Wording.

```suggestion
Note that TLS can be enabled in three different modes:
```

> - Only on Apache Kafka Connect REST interface.

Reviewer: Nitpick: Add an empty line before a list.
Suggestion: Improved wording for list elements.

```suggestion

- For Apache Kafka Connect REST interface only
```

> - Only on the relation between Apache Kafka cluster and Apache Kafka Connect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For the relation between Apache Kafka cluster and Apache Kafka Connect
```

> - Both.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For both the REST interface and the relation
```

To enable TLS on the Apache Kafka Connect REST interface, use following commands:

```shell
# deploy the TLS charm
juju deploy self-signed-certificates --channel=stable
# to enable TLS on Apache Kafka Connect, relate the applications
juju integrate self-signed-certificates kafka-connect
```

To enable TLS on the relation between Apache Kafka cluster and Apache Kafka Connect, use the following commands:

```
juju integrate self-signed-certificates kafka
```

To disable TLS on each interface, remove the respective relation.

> ```shell

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```shell
```

juju remove-relation kafka-connect self-signed-certificates
juju remove-relation kafka self-signed-certificates
```

> Note: The TLS settings here are for self-signed-certificates which are not recommended for production clusters, the `tls-certificates-operator` charm offers a variety of configurations, read more on the TLS charm [here](https://charmhub.io/tls-certificates-operator)

Reviewer: Suggestion: We most often use quotes for note blocks in README file.

```suggestion
> Note: The TLS settings here are for self-signed-certificates which are not recommended for production clusters, the `tls-certificates-operator` charm offers a variety of configurations, read more on the TLS charm [here](https://charmhub.io/tls-certificates-operator)
```

> 

Reviewer: Suggestion: Delete redundant empty line.

```suggestion
```

## Monitoring

The Charmed Apache Kafka Connect Operator comes with the [JMX exporter](https://github.com/prometheus/jmx_exporter/).
The metrics can be queried by accessing the `http://<unit-ip>:9100/metrics` endpoints.

Additionally, the charm provides integration with the [Canonical Observability Stack](https://charmhub.io/topics/canonical-observability-stack).

Deploy the `cos-lite` bundle in a Kubernetes environment. This can be done by following the
[deployment tutorial](https://charmhub.io/topics/canonical-observability-stack/tutorials/install-microk8s).
Since the Charmed Apache Kafka Operator is deployed on a machine environment, it is needed to offer the endpoints
of the COS relations. The [offers-overlay](https://github.com/canonical/cos-lite-bundle/blob/main/overlays/offers-overlay.yaml)
can be used, and this step is shown in the COS tutorial.

Next, deploy [grafana-agent](https://charmhub.io/grafana-agent) and follow the
[tutorial](https://discourse.charmhub.io/t/using-the-grafana-agent-machine-charm/8896)
to relate it to the COS Lite offers.

> Now, relate `kafka-connect` with the grafana-agent:

Reviewer: Suggestion: For consistency, use both names as literal blocks.

```suggestion
Now, relate `kafka-connect` with the `grafana-agent`:
```

```shell
juju integrate kafka-connect grafana-agent
```

After this is complete, Grafana will have the `Kafka Connect Cluster` dashboard available.

## Contributing

Please see the [Juju SDK docs](https://juju.is/docs/sdk) for guidelines on enhancements to this charm following best practice guidelines, and [CONTRIBUTING.md](https://github.com/canonical/kafka-connect-operator/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md) for developer guidance. 

### We are Hiring!

Also, if you truly enjoy working on open-source projects like this one and you would like to be part of the OSS revolution, please don't forget to check out the [open positions](https://canonical.com/careers/all) we have at [Canonical](https://canonical.com/). 

> ## License

Reviewer: Suggestion: Add an empty line after a heading.

```suggestion
## License

```

> The Charmed Karapace K8s Operator is free software, distributed under the Apache Software License, version 2.0. See [LICENSE](https://github.com/canonical/kafka-connect-operator/blob/main/LICENSE) for more information.

Reviewer: ToDo: Fix the name of the product.

```suggestion
The Charmed Kafka Connect Operator is free software, distributed under the Apache Software License, version 2.0. See [LICENSE](https://github.com/canonical/kafka-connect-operator/blob/main/LICENSE) for more information.
```

```

To watch the process, `juju status` can be used. Once all the units show as `active|idle`, the Kafka Connect cluster is ready to be used.

### Plugin Management

Kafka Connect uses a pluggable architecture model, meaning that the user could add desired functionalities by means of **Plugins**, also known as **Connectors**. Simply put, plugins are bundles of JAR files adhering to Kafka Connect Connector Interface. These connectors could be an implementation of a data source connector, data sink connector, a transformer or a converter. Kafka Connect automatically discovers added plugins, and the user could use the exposed REST interface to define desired ETL tasks based on available plugins.

In the Charmed Kafka Connect operator, adding a plugin is as simple as calling the `juju attach-resource` command. Make sure that you bundle all required JAR files into a single TAR archive (for example, `my-plugin.tar`) and then use the following command:

```shell
juju attach-resource kafka-connect connect-plugin=./my-plugin.tar
```

This would trigger a restart of the `kafka-connect` charm. Once all units are shown as `active|idle`, your new plugin is ready for use. 

> There is no limit for the number of plugins that could be added manually. However, for common use-cases of ETL tasks on Data Platform charmed operators we recommend using the [Template Connect Integrator](https://github.com/canonical/template-connect-integrator) charm.

Reviewer 2: **nitpick:**
```suggestion
While any plugin can be manually uploaded, for common use-cases of ETL tasks on Data Platform charmed operators we recommend using the [Template Connect Integrator](https://github.com/canonical/template-connect-integrator) charm.
```

### User Management on the REST Interface

> Kafka Connect uses a RESTful API for common administrative tasks. By default, Charmed Kafka Connect enforces authentication on the Kafka Connect REST API.

Reviewer 2: **nitpick:**
```suggestion
Kafka Connect uses a RESTful API for common administrative tasks. By default, Charmed Kafka Connect enforces HTTP Basic authentication on this API.
```

Internal users on the Charmed Kafka Connect application could be managed using [Juju user secrets](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/juju/latest/reference/secret/index.html#user). 

The secret data should contain a mapping of `username=password`s and access to the secret should be granted to the Kafka Connect application. Then, the Kafka Connect application should be configured to use the user secret by setting the `system-users` config option.

> The complete flow for defining custom credentials on the Charmed Kafka Connect application would be as following: 
> 

Reviewer 2: **nitpick:**
```suggestion
The complete flow for defining custom credentials for the Charmed Kafka Connect application is as follows: 

```

> ```bash
> # add a user secret defining the internal "admin" user's password
> juju add-secret mysecret admin=adminpass
> # You will receive a secret-id in response which looks like: secret:cvh7kruupa1s46bqvuig
> 
> # grant access to the secret
> juju grant-secret mysecret kafka-connect
> 
> # configure Kafka Connect application to use the provided secret
> juju config kafka-connect system-users=secret:cvh7kruupa1s46bqvuig
> ```

Reviewer 2: **todo:**

````suggestion
Add a user secret defining the internal `admin` user's password:

```bash
juju add-secret mysecret admin=adminpass
```

You will receive a secret-id in response which looks like: 

```bash
secret:cvh7kruupa1s46bqvuig
```

Then, grant access to the secret with:

```bash
juju grant-secret mysecret kafka-connect
```

Finally, configure the Kafka Connect application to use the provided secret:

```bash
juju config kafka-connect system-users=secret:cvh7kruupa1s46bqvuig
```
````

> To verify that Kafka Connect is properly configured and functioning, you could send a request to the REST interface to list all registered connectors using the password set in Juju secret:

Reviewer 2: **todo:**
```suggestion
To verify that Kafka Connect is properly configured and functioning, send a request to the REST interface listing all registered connectors using the password set in Juju secret:
```

```bash
curl -u admin:adminpass -X GET http://<kafka-connect-unit-ip>:8083/connector-plugins
```

You should get a response like below:

```bash
[
  {
    "class": "org.apache.kafka.connect.mirror.MirrorCheckpointConnector",
    "type": "source",
    "version": "3.9.0-ubuntu1"
  },
  {
    "class": "org.apache.kafka.connect.mirror.MirrorHeartbeatConnector",
    "type": "source",
    "version": "3.9.0-ubuntu1"
  },
  {
    "class": "org.apache.kafka.connect.mirror.MirrorSourceConnector",
    "type": "source",
    "version": "3.9.0-ubuntu1"
  }
]
```

## Relations

> The Charmed Kafka Connect Operator supports Juju [relations](https://juju.is/docs/olm/relations) for interfaces listed below.

Reviewer 2: **todo:** This link 404s

Author: fixed :) looks like they moved the docs to documentation.ubuntu.com/juju

A curated set of integrators for common ETL use cases within the Canonical Data Platform product line is available in the [Template Connect Integrator](https://github.com/canonical/template-connect-integrator) repository. These integrators support use cases such as loading data to and from MySQL, PostgreSQL, OpenSearch, S3-compatible storage services, and active/passive replication of Apache Kafka topics using MirrorMaker.

#### The `tls-certificates` interface

The `tls-certificates` interface could be used with any charm that provides TLS certificate lifecycle management functionality, following [`this specification`](https://github.com/canonical/charm-relation-interfaces/tree/main/docs/json_schemas/tls_certificates/v1). One example is the [`self-signed-certificates`](https://github.com/canonical/self-signed-certificates-operator) operator by Canonical.

Note that TLS can be enabled in three different modes:

- For Kafka Connect REST interface only
- For the relation between Apache Kafka cluster and Kafka Connect
- For both the REST interface and the relation

> To enable TLS on the Kafka Connect REST interface, use following commands:
> 
> ```shell
> # deploy the TLS charm
> juju deploy self-signed-certificates --channel=stable
> # to enable TLS on Kafka Connect REST endpoint, relate the applications
> juju integrate self-signed-certificates kafka-connect
> ```
> 
> To enable TLS on the relation between Apache Kafka cluster and Kafka Connect, use the following commands:
> 
> ```
> juju integrate self-signed-certificates kafka
> ```
> 
> To disable TLS on each interface, remove the respective relation.
> 
> ```shell
> juju remove-relation kafka-connect self-signed-certificates
> juju remove-relation kafka self-signed-certificates
> ```

Reviewer 2: **todo:**
````suggestion
To enable TLS on the Kafka Connect REST interface, first deploy the TLS charm and relate it to the Charmed Kafka Connect application:

```bash
juju deploy self-signed-certificates --channel=stable
juju integrate self-signed-certificates kafka-connect
```

To enable TLS on the relation between the Apache Kafka and Kafka Connect clusters: 

```bash
juju integrate self-signed-certificates kafka
```

To disable TLS on each interface, remove their respective relations:

```bash
juju remove-relation kafka-connect self-signed-certificates
juju remove-relation kafka self-signed-certificates
```
````

## Monitoring

The Charmed Kafka Connect Operator comes with the [JMX exporter](https://github.com/prometheus/jmx_exporter/).
The metrics can be queried by accessing the `http://<unit-ip>:9100/metrics` endpoints.

Additionally, the charm provides integration with the [Canonical Observability Stack](https://charmhub.io/topics/canonical-observability-stack).

Deploy the `cos-lite` bundle in a Kubernetes environment. This can be done by following the
[deployment tutorial](https://charmhub.io/topics/canonical-observability-stack/tutorials/install-microk8s).
Since the Charmed Kafka Connect Operator is deployed on a machine environment, it is needed to offer the endpoints
of the COS relations. The [offers-overlay](https://github.com/canonical/cos-lite-bundle/blob/main/overlays/offers-overlay.yaml)
can be used, and this step is shown in the COS tutorial.

Next, deploy [grafana-agent](https://charmhub.io/grafana-agent) and follow the
[tutorial](https://discourse.charmhub.io/t/using-the-grafana-agent-machine-charm/8896)
to relate it to the COS Lite offers.

Now, relate `kafka-connect` with the `grafana-agent`:

> ```shell
> juju integrate kafka-connect grafana-agent
> ```

Reviewer 2: **todo:**
```suggestion
```bash
juju integrate kafka-connect grafana-agent
```
```

After this is complete, Grafana will have the `Kafka Connect Cluster` dashboard available.

## Contributing

> Please see the [Juju SDK docs](https://juju.is/docs/sdk) for guidelines on enhancements to this charm following best practice guidelines, and [CONTRIBUTING.md](https://github.com/canonical/kafka-connect-operator/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md) for developer guidance. 

Reviewer 2: **nitpick:**
```suggestion
Please see the [Juju SDK docs](https://juju.is/docs/sdk) for guidelines on enhancements to this charm following best practice guidelines, and [CONTRIBUTING.md](https://github.com/canonical/kafka-connect-operator/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md) for developer guidance.
```

#### The `tls-certificates` interface

The `tls-certificates` interface could be used with any charm that provides TLS certificate lifecycle management functionality, following [`this specification`](https://github.com/canonical/charm-relation-interfaces/tree/main/docs/json_schemas/tls_certificates/v1). One example is the [`self-signed-certificates`](https://github.com/canonical/self-signed-certificates-operator) operator by Canonical.

Note that TLS can be enabled in three different modes:

- For Kafka Connect REST interface only
- For the relation between Apache Kafka cluster and Kafka Connect
- For both the REST interface and the relation

To enable TLS on the Kafka Connect REST interface, first deploy the TLS charm and relate it to the Charmed Kafka Connect application:

```bash

> juju deploy self-signed-certificates --channel=stable

Reviewer: Question: do we need to specify the `stable` here? I think it's the default risk.

Author: You're right, no need to mention that. fixed.

juju integrate self-signed-certificates kafka-connect
```

To enable TLS on the relation between the Apache Kafka and Kafka Connect clusters: 

```bash
juju integrate self-signed-certificates kafka
```

To disable TLS on each interface, remove their respective relations:

```bash
juju remove-relation kafka-connect self-signed-certificates
juju remove-relation kafka self-signed-certificates
```

> > Note: The TLS settings here are for self-signed-certificates which are not recommended for production clusters, the `tls-certificates-operator` charm offers a variety of configurations, read more on the TLS charm [here](https://charmhub.io/tls-certificates-operator)

Reviewer: Suggestion: A few wording improvements:
1. Removed redundant kebab-case
2. Removed a link with text `here`
3. Other minor wording improvements

```suggestion
> Note: The TLS settings provided here are intended for use with self-signed certificates, which are not recommended for production clusters. For more secure TLS certificate providers, consider using the `tls-certificates-operator` charm. See its [Charmhub page](https://charmhub.io/tls-certificates-operator) for details.
```

## Monitoring

The Charmed Kafka Connect Operator comes with the [JMX exporter](https://github.com/prometheus/jmx_exporter/).
The metrics can be queried by accessing the `http://<unit-ip>:9100/metrics` endpoints.

Additionally, the charm provides integration with the [Canonical Observability Stack](https://charmhub.io/topics/canonical-observability-stack).

Deploy the `cos-lite` bundle in a Kubernetes environment. This can be done by following the

> [deployment tutorial](https://charmhub.io/topics/canonical-observability-stack/tutorials/install-microk8s).

Reviewer: Suggestion: make the link text more specific.

```suggestion
[COS deployment tutorial](https://charmhub.io/topics/canonical-observability-stack/tutorials/install-microk8s).
```

> Since the Charmed Kafka Connect Operator is deployed on a machine environment, it is needed to offer the endpoints
> of the COS relations. The [offers-overlay](https://github.com/canonical/cos-lite-bundle/blob/main/overlays/offers-overlay.yaml)
> can be used, and this step is shown in the COS tutorial.

Reviewer: Suggestion: wording improvements.

```suggestion
Since the Charmed Kafka Connect Operator is deployed on a machine environment, it needs to offer the endpoints
for the COS relations. The [offers-overlay](https://github.com/canonical/cos-lite-bundle/blob/main/overlays/offers-overlay.yaml)
can be used for that, see the COS deployment tutorial link above for guidance.
```

Next, deploy [grafana-agent](https://charmhub.io/grafana-agent) and follow the
[tutorial](https://discourse.charmhub.io/t/using-the-grafana-agent-machine-charm/8896)
to relate it to the COS Lite offers.

> Now, relate `kafka-connect` with the `grafana-agent`:

Reviewer: Suggestion: Our general guidance is to use `integrate` for the verb. We still can use `relation` for nouns.

```suggestion
Now, integrate `kafka-connect` and `grafana-agent` charms:
```
